---
layout: post
title: when the archives become less daunting
---

Throughout the semester, Professor Graham has emphasized the benefit of digital tools for our own historical research. Now, it is not that I didn't believe him at first (sorry, Shawn) but this recurring statement only became real to me when I was out doing research. 
I have recently begun helping someone do research for a much larger project. The other day we skyped to discuss the types of sources he would like to use and the scope of the project. 
The conversation between the two of us struck a chord with me, not only about how much I have learned this year (thanks, Shawn), but the ways in which these digital tools have shaped the way I think. 
Most interestingly, it has transformed the way I view the archives itself. 
The project lead mentioned analyzing maps and looking through newspapers. He mentioned that he would love it if he could paste a historic map over the present day terrain to conceptualize it differently, but that he couldn't see it being possible. 
Impossible? Pfffft. I instantly blurted out three resources for stacking historic maps over contemporary maps. 
[A good tutorial for using Google Maps](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/googlemaps-googleearth)
[Palladio](http://palladio.designhumanities.org/#/)
[Micro History Mapping Project](http://xtina-r.github.io/daea/)
We then moved on to looking at newspaper sources digitized online. He mentioned that there were way too many newspaper articles that would be irrelevant to our research and it would take too much time to sift through the newspapers. I then mentioned scraping the sources from the website and using Regular Expressions and the Command Line to find specific references to our topic. We then could search and split the documents to look at only the ones related to our topics as individual files. Want more information on how to do this? Wait and see my group's final project for this class where we do just this with Charles Darwin's published letters! 
While he did not understand most of what I said, I realized that what would seem a daunting task searching through the archives could be simplified with a bit of knowledge of these digital tools. These tools allow us to view our research through a different lens, but also view the scope of our projects differently. Much more is possible when you learn to combine the digital and humanities! 
